P1| Chapter 4: Martha
P2| When Mary opened her eyes in the morning, it was because a young housemaid had come into the room to light the fire. The girl was kneeling on the hearth rug, noisily raking out the cinders. Mary lay still and watched her for a few moments, then began to look around. She had never seen a room like this before, and she thought it was strange and gloomy. The walls were covered with tapestries showing a forest scene. Strangely dressed people stood under the trees, and in the distance, she could see the turrets of a castle. There were hunters, horses, dogs, and ladies, and Mary felt almost as if she were in the forest with them. Through a deep window, she could see a vast, rising stretch of land. It seemed to have no trees at all and looked like an endless, dull, purplish sea.
P3| "What is that?" she asked, pointing out the window.
P4| Martha, the young housemaid, had just stood up. She looked out and pointed too.
P5| "That there?" she said.
P6| "Yes."
P7| "That's the moor," Martha replied with a good-natured grin. "Do you like it?"
P8| "No," Mary answered. "I hate it."
P9| "That's because you're not used to it," Martha said, turning back to the fireplace. "You think it's too big and bare now. But you'll get to like it."
P10| "Do you?" Mary asked.
P11| "Yes, I really do," Martha answered, cheerfully polishing the fireplace grate. "I just love it. It's not bare at all. It's covered with growing things that smell sweet. It's truly beautiful in the spring and summer when the gorse, broom, and heather are in bloom. It smells of honey, and there's so much fresh air. The sky looks so high, and the bees and skylarks make such a lovely sound humming and singing. Oh, I wouldn't live away from the moor for anything!"
P12| Mary listened to her with a serious, puzzled expression. The Indian servants she was used to were not like this at all. They were submissive and respectful, and they never dared to talk to their masters as equals. They bowed low, calling them "protector of the poor" and other titles like that. In India, servants were ordered to do things, not asked. It wasn't the custom to say "please" and "thank you," and Mary had always slapped her Ayah in the face when she was angry. She wondered what this girl would do if someone slapped her. Martha was a round, rosy, good-natured looking girl, but she had a sturdy, strong way about her that made Mary wonder if she might actually slap back—even if the person who slapped her was only a little girl.
P13| "You are a strange servant," Mary said from her pillows, rather haughtily.
P14| Martha sat back on her heels, blacking brush in hand, and laughed. She didn't seem the least bit annoyed.
P15| "Oh, I know that!" she said. "If there were a grand mistress here at Misselthwaite, I would never have been hired as an under-housemaid. I might have been allowed to be a kitchen maid, but I would never have been allowed upstairs. I'm too common, and I talk too much Yorkshire. But this is a strange house, even if it is grand. It seems like there's neither a master nor a mistress, except for Mr. Pitcher and Mrs. Medlock. Mr. Craven doesn't want to be bothered by anything when he's here, and he's almost always away. Mrs. Medlock gave me the job out of kindness. She told me she could never have done it if Misselthwaite were run like other big houses."
P16| "Are you going to be my servant?" Mary asked, still speaking in her bossy Indian way.
P17| Martha began scrubbing the grate again.
P18| "I'm Mrs. Medlock's servant," she said firmly. "And she is Mr. Craven's. But I'm supposed to do the housemaid's work up here and help look after you a bit. Though you won't need much waiting on."
P19| "Who is going to dress me?" Mary demanded.
P20| Martha sat back on her heels again and stared in amazement, her Yorkshire accent growing stronger.
P21| "Can't you dress yourself?" she asked.
P22| "What do you mean? I don't understand your language," Mary said.
P23| "Oh, I forgot," Martha said. "Mrs. Medlock told me I'd have to be careful, or you wouldn't understand what I was saying. I mean, can't you put on your own clothes?"
P24| "No," Mary answered, quite insulted. "I never have in my life. My Ayah dressed me, of course."
P25| "Well," Martha said, completely unaware that she was being cheeky, "it's time you learned. You can't start too young. It will do you good to wait on yourself a bit. My mother always said she couldn't understand why rich people's children didn't turn out to be complete fools, what with nurses washing and dressing them and taking them out for walks as if they were puppies!"
P26| "It is different in India," Mary said disdainfully. She could hardly bear this.
P27| But Martha was not discouraged at all.
P28| "Oh, I can see it's different," she answered almost sympathetically. "I suppose it's because there are so many natives there instead of regular English people. When I heard you were coming from India, I thought you were a native too."
P29| Mary sat up in bed, absolutely furious.
P30| "What!" she cried. "What! You thought I was a native? You—you daughter of a pig!"
P31| Martha stared and her face flushed.
P32| "Who are you calling names?" she said. "You shouldn't get so upset. That's no way for a young lady to talk. I have nothing against natives. When you read about them in pamphlets, they're always very religious. You always read that a native is a brother. I've never seen one, and I was really pleased to think I was going to see one up close. When I came in to light your fire this morning, I crept up to your bed and carefully pulled the covers back to look at you. And there you were," she added with disappointment, "no more native than me—even if you are very yellow."
P33| Mary didn't even try to control her anger and humiliation.
P34| "You thought I was a native! How dare you! You don't know anything about natives! They aren't like you—they are servants who have to bow to you! You know nothing about India. You know nothing about anything!"
P35| She was in such a rage and felt so helpless under the girl's simple stare. Suddenly, she felt so terribly lonely and away from everything she knew and understood, and that understood her. She threw herself face down on the pillows and burst into passionate tears. She sobbed so uncontrollably that good-natured Martha felt a little frightened and very sorry for her. She walked over to the bed and bent over her.
P36| "Oh, you mustn't cry like that!" she begged. "You really mustn't. I didn't know you'd be so upset. I don't know anything about anything, just like you said. I beg your pardon, Miss. Please stop crying."
P37| There was something comforting and genuinely friendly in her warm Yorkshire voice and sturdy manner, which helped calm Mary down. She gradually stopped crying and grew quiet. Martha looked relieved.
P38| "It's time for you to get up now," she said. "Mrs. Medlock told me to bring your breakfast, tea, and dinner into the room next door. It's been set up as a nursery for you. I'll help you put on your clothes if you'll get out of bed. If the buttons are in the back, you won't be able to do them yourself."
P39| When Mary finally decided to get up, the clothes Martha took from the wardrobe were not the ones she had worn when she arrived the night before with Mrs. Medlock.
P40| "Those are not mine," she said. "Mine are black."
P41| She looked over the thick, white wool coat and dress, and added with cold approval:
P42| "Those are nicer than mine."
P43| "These are the ones you must put on," Martha answered. "Mr. Craven ordered Mrs. Medlock to buy them in London. He said, 'I won't have a child dressed in black wandering around like a lost soul. It would make the place sadder than it already is. Put some color on her.' My mother said she knew exactly what he meant. Mother always knows what people mean. She doesn't like black clothing herself."
P44| "I hate black things," Mary said.
P45| The process of getting dressed taught both of them a few things. Martha had buttoned up her little sisters and brothers, but she had never seen a child who stood completely still, waiting for someone else to do everything for her as if she had no hands or feet of her own.
P46| "Why don't you put on your own shoes?" she asked when Mary silently held out her foot.
P47| "My Ayah did it," Mary answered, staring. "It was the custom."
P48| She said that very often—"It was the custom." The Indian servants were always saying it. If you told them to do something their ancestors hadn't done for a thousand years, they would look at you mildly and say, "It is not the custom," and you knew that was the end of the matter.
P49| It had never been the custom for Mary to do anything but stand still and let herself be dressed like a doll. But before she was even ready for breakfast, she began to suspect that her life at Misselthwaite Manor would end up teaching her many new things—like putting on her own shoes and stockings, and picking up the things she dropped. If Martha had been a well-trained, elegant lady's maid, she would have been much more submissive and respectful. She would have known it was her job to brush Mary's hair, button her boots, and tidy up after her. Instead, she was just an untrained country girl from Yorkshire who had grown up in a cottage on the moor with a crowd of little brothers and sisters. None of them had ever dreamed of doing anything but looking after themselves and the younger ones, who were either babies or just learning to waddle around and trip over things.
P50| If Mary Lennox had been a child who was easily amused, she might have laughed at how talkative Martha was. Instead, she only listened coldly, wondering at the girl's free and easy manners. At first, she wasn't interested at all, but gradually, as the girl kept chatting in her good-natured, down-to-earth way, Mary began to pay attention to what she was saying.
P51| "Oh, you should see them all!" Martha said. "There are twelve of us, and my father only makes sixteen shillings a week. I can tell you, my mother has a hard time putting enough porridge on the table for everyone. They run around on the moor and play there all day, and mother says the fresh air of the moor fattens them up. She says she believes they eat the grass just like the wild ponies do! Our Dickon is twelve years old, and he has a young pony he calls his own."
P52| "Where did he get it?" Mary asked.
P53| "He found it on the moor with its mother when it was just a baby. He began to make friends with it, giving it pieces of bread and pulling fresh grass for it. The pony got to like him so much that it follows him around now and lets him ride on its back. Dickon is a kind boy, and animals just love him."
P54| Mary had never owned a pet of her own, but she had always thought she would like one. So, she began to feel a tiny bit of interest in Dickon, and since she had never cared about anyone but herself before, it was the start of a healthy new feeling. When she went into the room that had been set up as her nursery, she found it was very similar to the room she had slept in. It wasn't a child's room at all, but a room for a grown-up, filled with gloomy old portraits on the walls and heavy, dark oak chairs. In the center, a table was set with a hearty breakfast. But Mary had always had a very small appetite, and she looked at the first plate Martha set before her with total indifference.
P55| "I don't want it," she said.
P56| "You don't want your porridge!" Martha exclaimed in disbelief.
P57| "No."
P58| "You don't know how good it is. Put a little syrup or some sugar on it."
P59| "I don't want it," Mary repeated.
P60| "Oh!" Martha said. "I can't bear to see good food go to waste. If our children were at this table, they'd clear it clean in five minutes."
P61| "Why?" Mary asked coldly.
P62| "Why!" Martha echoed. "Because they've hardly ever had full stomachs in their lives. They're as hungry as young hawks and foxes."
P63| "I don't know what it feels like to be hungry," Mary said, with the simple indifference of someone who had never gone without.
P64| Martha looked indignant.
P65| "Well, it would do you good to try it, I can see that plain enough," she said bluntly. "I have no patience with people who just sit and stare at good bread and meat. My goodness! I wish Dickon and Phil and Jane and the rest of them had what's on this table right under their aprons."
P66| "Why don't you take it to them?" Mary suggested.
P67| "It's not mine," Martha answered firmly. "And today isn't my day off. I only get one day off a month, just like the rest of the servants. Then I go home, help my mother clean up, and give her a day of rest."
P68| Mary drank some tea and ate a little toast with marmalade.
P69| "Wrap up warm and run outside to play," Martha said. "It will do you good and help build up an appetite for your dinner."
P70| Mary walked over to the window. There were gardens, pathways, and large trees, but everything looked grey and wintry.
P71| "Outside? Why should I go outside on a day like this?"
P72| "Well, if you don't go out, you'll have to stay in, and what else do you have to do?"
P73| Mary looked around the room. There was absolutely nothing to do. When Mrs. Medlock set up the nursery, she hadn't thought about games or toys. Perhaps it would be better to go out and see what the gardens looked like.
P74| "Who will go with me?" she asked.
P75| Martha stared.
P76| "You'll go by yourself," Martha answered. "You'll have to learn to play like other children do when they don't have brothers and sisters. Our Dickon goes off onto the moor by himself and plays for hours. That's how he made friends with the pony. He has sheep on the moor that know him, and birds that fly down to eat right out of his hand. No matter how little food there is, he always saves a bit of his bread to feed his pets."
P77| It was actually this mention of Dickon that made Mary decide to go outside, though she didn't realize it herself. There would at least be birds outside, even if there were no ponies or sheep. They would be different from the birds in India, and it might amuse her to watch them.
P78| Martha found Mary's coat and hat, along with a pair of sturdy little boots, and showed her the way downstairs.
P79| "If you go round that way, you'll reach the gardens," she said, pointing to a gate in a wall of thick shrubbery. "There are lots of flowers in the summertime, but nothing is blooming now." She seemed to hesitate for a second before she added, "One of the gardens is locked up. No one has been inside it for ten years."
P80| "Why?" Mary asked despite herself. Here was another locked door to add to the hundred others in this strange house.
P81| "Mr. Craven had it shut up when his wife died so suddenly. He won't let anyone go inside. It was her garden. He locked the door, dug a hole, and buried the key. Ah, there's Mrs. Medlock's bell ringing—I must run!"
P82| After Martha left, Mary turned down the path leading to the gate in the shrubbery. She couldn't stop thinking about the garden that no one had entered for ten years. She wondered what it looked like and if there were any flowers still alive inside. Once she passed through the shrubbery gate, she found herself in vast gardens with wide lawns and winding paths bordered by neatly trimmed hedges. There were trees, flowerbeds, evergreens clipped into strange shapes, and a large pool with an old grey fountain in the middle. But the flowerbeds were bare and wintry, and the fountain was silent. This was clearly not the closed garden. How could a garden be shut up anyway? You could always just walk into a garden.
P83| She was just thinking about this when she noticed that the path she was following ended at a long wall covered in ivy. She didn't know enough about England to realize she was approaching the kitchen gardens, where the vegetables and fruit trees grew. She walked up to the wall and found a green door set into the ivy, and it was wide open. This was clearly not the locked garden, so she could go right in.
P84| She stepped through the door and found a garden with high walls all around it. It was only one of several walled gardens that seemed to connect to one another. She saw another open green door showing bushes and pathways between beds of winter vegetables. Fruit trees were trained flat against the brick walls, and glass frames covered some of the plant beds. The place looked bare and ugly, Mary thought as she stood and stared around. It might be nicer in the summer when things were green, but there was nothing pretty about it now.
P85| Before long, an old man with a spade over his shoulder walked through the door from the second garden. He looked startled to see Mary, then touched his cap in a brief greeting. He had a grumpy old face and didn't seem pleased to see her at all—but then, she was already unhappy with his garden, wore her sour "contrary" expression, and certainly didn't look pleased to see him either.
P86| "What is this place?" she asked.
P87| "One of the kitchen gardens," he answered.
P88| "What is that?" Mary asked, pointing through the other green door.
P89| "Another of them," he said shortly. "There's another on the other side of the wall, and the orchard is on the other side of that."
P90| "Can I go inside them?" Mary asked.
P91| "If you want. But there's nothing to see."
P92| Mary didn't answer. She walked down the path and through the second green door. There, she found more walls, winter vegetables, and glass frames, but in the next wall, there was another green door, and this one was closed. Perhaps it led into the garden no one had seen for ten years. Since she wasn't a timid child and always did exactly what she wanted, Mary went up to the door and turned the handle. She actually hoped it wouldn't open, because she wanted to be sure she had found the mysterious garden—but it opened quite easily. She walked through and found herself in an orchard. It also had walls all around it, with fruit trees trained against them and bare trees growing in the winter-browned grass, but there was no green door to be seen anywhere. Mary searched for one. As she had entered the upper end of the orchard, she noticed that the wall didn't seem to stop, but extended further, as if it enclosed another area on the other side. She could see the tops of trees rising above the wall. As she stood still, she noticed a bird with a bright red breast sitting on the very top branch of one of them. Suddenly, he burst into a cheerful winter song—almost as if he had spotted her and was calling out to her.
P93| She stopped to listen, and somehow his cheerful, friendly little whistle made her feel happy. Even a disagreeable little girl can feel lonely, and the huge, empty house, the vast bare moor, and the silent, wintry gardens had made Mary feel as if she were the only person left in the world. If she had been an affectionate child who was used to being loved, she would have been heartbroken. But even though she was "Mistress Mary, Quite Contrary," she felt deeply lonely, and this bright-breasted little bird brought a look to her sour face that was almost a smile. She listened to him until he flew away. He was nothing like the birds in India. She liked him and wondered if she would ever see him again. Perhaps he lived in the mysterious garden and knew all its secrets.
P94| Perhaps it was because she had absolutely nothing to do that she thought so much about the deserted garden. She was curious and wanted to see what was inside. Why had Mr. Archibald Craven buried the key? If he loved his wife so much, why did he hate her garden? She wondered if she would ever meet him. She knew that if she did, she wouldn't like him, and he wouldn't like her. She would probably just stand and stare at him without saying a word, even though she would be desperate to ask why he had done such a strange thing.
P95| "People never like me, and I never like people," she thought. "And I can never talk the way the Crawford children did. They were always talking and laughing and playing."
P96| She thought of the robin and how he seemed to sing his song right at her. Remembering the treetop where he had perched, she stopped suddenly on the path.
P97| "I believe that tree was in the secret garden—I feel sure it was," she said. "There was a wall around it, and no door."
P98| She walked back into the first kitchen garden she had entered and found the old gardener digging. She went to stand near him and watched him for a few moments in her cold, quiet way. He ignored her, so at last she spoke to him.
P99| "I have been into the other gardens," she said.
P100| "There was nothing to stop you," he answered crustily.
P101| "I went into the orchard."
P102| "There was no dog at the door to bite you," he answered.
P103| "There was no door from there into the other garden," Mary said.
P104| "What garden?" he asked in a rough voice, stopping his digging for a moment.
P105| "The one on the other side of the wall," Mary answered. "There are trees there—I saw their tops. A bird with a red breast was sitting on one of them, and he sang."
P106| To her surprise, the grumpy, weather-beaten old face actually changed. A slow smile spread across it, and the gardener looked completely different. It made Mary realize how much nicer a person looked when they smiled. She had never thought about that before.
P107| He turned toward the orchard side of the garden and let out a soft, low whistle. She couldn't understand how such a grumpy man could make such a sweet, coaxing sound.
P108| Almost immediately, a wonderful thing happened. She heard a soft rustling flight through the air, and the red-breasted bird came flying right toward them. He landed on a large clump of earth, very close to the gardener's foot.
P109| "Here he is," the old man chuckled, and then he spoke to the bird as if talking to a child.
P110| "Where have you been, you cheeky little beggar?" he said. "I haven't seen you all day. Have you started your courting this early in the season? You're too forward."
P111| The bird tilted his tiny head to one side and looked up at him with a soft, bright eye that looked like a black dewdrop. He seemed completely comfortable and not the least bit afraid. He hopped around, briskly pecking at the earth for seeds and insects. It gave Mary a strange, warm feeling in her heart because he was so pretty, cheerful, and full of personality. He had a plump little body, a delicate beak, and slender, fragile legs.
P112| "Will he always come when you call him?" she asked in a near whisper.
P113| "Yes, that he will. I've known him ever since he was a baby. He came out of the nest in that other garden. When he first flew over the wall, he was too weak to fly back for a few days, so we became friends. When he finally went back over the wall, the rest of the family was gone. He was lonely, so he came back to me."
P114| "What kind of bird is he?" Mary asked.
P115| "Don't you know? He's a robin redbreast, and they're the friendliest, most curious birds alive. They're almost as friendly as dogs, if you know how to get along with them. Watch him pecking around there and looking at us now and then. He knows we're talking about him."
P116| It was the strangest thing to watch the old man. He looked at the plump little bird with its bright red chest as if he were both proud and incredibly fond of it.
P117| "He's a proud one," he chuckled. "He likes to hear people talk about him. And curious—bless me, there was never a bird so nosy and curious. He's always coming to see what I'm planting. He knows all the things Mr. Craven never bothers to find out. He's the real head gardener, he is."
P118| The robin hopped about, busily pecking at the soil, occasionally stopping to look up at them. Mary felt his dark, dewdrop eyes watching her with intense curiosity. It really seemed as if he were trying to figure her out. The strange feeling in her heart grew stronger.
P119| "Where did the rest of the family fly to?" she asked.
P120| "There's no knowing. The parent birds push them out of the nest and make them fly, and they're scattered before you know it. This one was a smart little fellow, and he knew he was lonely."
P121| Mary stepped a little closer to the robin and looked at him intently.
P122| "I'm lonely," she said.
P123| She hadn't realized before that this was one of the things making her feel so sour and cross. She only seemed to understand it now, as she and the robin looked at each other.
P124| The old gardener pushed his cap back on his bald head and stared at her for a moment.
P125| "Are you the little girl from India?" he asked.
P126| Mary nodded.
P127| "Then it's no wonder you're lonely. You'll be even lonelier before you're through," he said.
P128| He began to dig again, driving his spade deep into the rich, dark garden soil while the robin hopped around, busy with his own work.
P129| "What is your name?" Mary asked.
P130| He stood up straight to answer.
P131| "Ben Weatherstaff," he answered, adding with a grumpy chuckle, "I'm lonely myself, except when he's with me," and he jerked his thumb toward the robin. "He's the only friend I've got."
P132| "I have no friends at all," Mary said. "I never had any. My Ayah didn't like me, and I never played with anyone."
P133| It was a Yorkshire habit to speak with blunt honesty, and old Ben Weatherstaff was a man of the moors.
P134| "You and me are quite a bit alike," he said. "We were cut from the same cloth. Neither of us is good-looking, and we're both as sour as we look. We've got the same bad tempers, the both of us, I'd bet."
P135| This was blunt honesty, and Mary Lennox had never heard the truth about herself in her entire life. Indian servants always bowed and submitted to whatever she did. She had never thought much about her own appearance, but now she wondered if she was as unattractive as Ben Weatherstaff. She also wondered if she looked as sour as he had before the robin arrived. She even began to wonder if she really was bad-tempered. The thoughts made her feel uncomfortable.
P136| Suddenly, a clear, rippling little sound broke out nearby, and she turned around. She was standing a few feet from a young apple tree, and the robin had flown onto one of its branches, bursting into a fragment of song. Ben Weatherstaff laughed out loud.
P137| "Why did he do that?" Mary asked.
P138| "He's made up his mind to be friends with you," Ben replied. "Well, I'll be. He's taken a real liking to you."
P139| "To me?" Mary said, moving softly toward the little tree and looking up.
P140| "Would you be friends with me?" she said to the robin, just as if she were speaking to a person. "Would you?" She didn't say it in her usual hard little voice or in her bossy Indian tone, but in a voice so soft, eager, and coaxing that Ben Weatherstaff was just as surprised as she had been when he whistled.
P141| "Well," he cried out, "you said that as sweet and natural as if you were a real child instead of a sharp little old woman. You said it almost the way Dickon talks to his wild creatures on the moor."
P142| "Do you know Dickon?" Mary asked, turning around quickly.
P143| "Everybody knows him. Dickon wanders around everywhere. The very blackberries and heather-bells know him. I'd bet the foxes show him where their cubs are sleeping, and the skylarks don't hide their nests from him."
P144| Mary would have liked to ask more questions. She was almost as curious about Dickon as she was about the locked garden. But just then, the robin, who had finished his song, gave his wings a little shake, spread them, and flew away. He had finished his visit and had other things to do.
P145| "He has flown over the wall!" Mary cried, watching him. "He has flown into the orchard—and now across the other wall—into the garden where there is no door!"
P146| "He lives there," old Ben said. "He hatched from his egg there. If he's courting, he's looking for some young lady robin who lives among the old rosebushes in there."
P147| "Rosebushes," Mary said. "Are there rosebushes?"
P148| Ben Weatherstaff picked up his spade again and began to dig.
P149| "There were ten years ago," he mumbled.
P150| "I should like to see them," Mary said. "Where is the green door? There must be a door somewhere."
P151| Ben drove his spade deep into the ground and looked just as unfriendly as he had when she first saw him.
P152| "There was one ten years ago, but there isn't now," he said.
P153| "No door!" Mary cried. "There must be one."
P154| "None that anyone can find, and none that is anyone's business. Don't be a meddling girl, poking your nose where it doesn't belong. Now, I have to get on with my work. Go on and play. I have no more time."
P155| And with that, he actually stopped digging, threw his spade over his shoulder, and walked off without even looking back or saying goodbye.
