P1| Chapter 10: Dickon
P2| The sun shone down for nearly a week on the secret garden. "The Secret Garden" was what Mary called it when she was thinking of it. She liked the name, and she liked even more the feeling that when its beautiful old walls shut her in, no one knew where she was. It felt almost like being shut out of the world in some fairy place. The few books she had read and liked had been fairy tales, and she had read of secret gardens in some of the stories. In those stories, people sometimes fell asleep in them for a hundred years, which she had always thought was rather silly. She had no intention of falling asleep. In fact, she was becoming wider awake with every day that passed at Misselthwaite. She was beginning to enjoy being outdoors; she no longer hated the wind, but loved it. She could run faster and longer, and she could skip up to a hundred. The bulbs in the secret garden must have been quite surprised. Mary cleared such nice, clean spaces around them that they had all the breathing room they wanted. Even though Mary didn't know it, the bulbs began to cheer up under the dark earth and work incredibly hard. The sun could reach them and warm them, and when the rain came down, it could water them directly, so they began to feel very much alive.
P3| Mary was an odd, determined little person, and now that she had something interesting to be determined about, she was completely absorbed. She worked, dug, and pulled up weeds steadily, growing more pleased with her work every hour instead of getting tired of it. It felt like a fascinating game. She found many more of the sprouting, pale green shoots than she had ever hoped to find. They seemed to be popping up everywhere, and every day she was sure she found tiny new ones—some so small they barely peeked above the soil. There were so many that she remembered Martha's words about "snowdrops by the thousands," and about bulbs spreading and making new ones. These had been left to themselves for ten years, and perhaps they had spread, just like the snowdrops, into thousands. She wondered how long it would be before they showed that they were flowers. Sometimes she stopped digging just to look at the garden, trying to imagine what it would look like when it was covered with thousands of lovely things in bloom.
P4| During that week of sunshine, she became closer with Ben Weatherstaff. She surprised him several times by suddenly appearing beside him, as if she had sprung right out of the earth. The truth was, she was afraid he would pick up his tools and go away if he saw her coming, so she always walked toward him as silently as possible. But he did not actually object to her presence as strongly as he had at first. Perhaps he was secretly flattered by her obvious desire for his elderly company. Besides, she was much more polite now. He did not know that when she first saw him, she had spoken to him as if he were a native servant in India. She hadn't realized that a stubborn, sturdy old Yorkshireman was not used to bowing to his masters or being ordered around by them.
P5| "You're like the robin," he said to her one morning when he lifted his head and saw her standing by him. "I never know when I'll see you, or which direction you'll come from."
P6| "He's friends with me now," Mary said.
P7| "That's just like him," snapped Ben Weatherstaff. "Flirting with the womenfolk just for vanity and show. There's nothing he wouldn't do to show off and flutter his tail feathers. He's as full of pride as an egg is full of meat."
P8| Ben seldom talked much and sometimes didn't even answer Mary's questions except with a grunt, but this morning he was more talkative than usual. He stood up and rested one heavy boot on the top of his spade while he looked her over.
P9| "How long have you been here?" he jerked out.
P10| "I think it's about a month," she answered.
P11| "You're beginning to do Misselthwaite credit," he said. "You're a bit fatter than you were, and you're not quite so yellow. You looked like a young plucked crow when you first came into this garden. I thought to myself that I'd never set eyes on an uglier, sourer-faced child."
P12| Mary was not vain, and since she had never thought much of her looks, she was not bothered by this.
P13| "I know I'm fatter," she said. "My stockings are getting tighter. They used to be all wrinkled. Look, there's the robin, Ben Weatherstaff."
P14| There, indeed, was the robin, and she thought he looked nicer than ever. His red breast was as glossy as satin, and he fluttered his wings and tail, tilted his head, and hopped about with all kinds of lively, graceful movements. He seemed determined to make Ben Weatherstaff admire him. But Ben was sarcastic.
P15| "Aye, there you are!" he said. "You can put up with me for a bit when you've got no one better. You've been reddening up your breast and polishing your feathers these last two weeks. I know what you're up to. You're courting some bold young lady somewhere, telling her lies about being the finest cock robin on Missel Moor, and how you're ready to fight all the rest of them."
P16| "Oh, look at him!" Mary exclaimed.
P17| The robin was clearly in a bold, charming mood. He hopped closer and closer, looking at Ben Weatherstaff more and more engagingly. He flew onto the nearest currant bush, tilted his head, and sang a little song right at him.
P18| "You think you'll win me over by doing that," said Ben, wrinkling his face in a way that made Mary sure he was trying not to smile. "You think no one can resist you—that's what you think."
P19| The robin spread his wings. Mary could hardly believe her eyes. He flew right up to the handle of Ben Weatherstaff's spade and landed on the very top of it. Then the old man's face slowly wrinkled into a brand new expression. He stood completely still, as if he were afraid to breathe—as if he wouldn't have moved for the world, lest his robin should fly away. He spoke in a whisper.
P20| "Well, I'm danged!" he said, as softly as if he were saying a gentle prayer. "You really do know how to get to a chap—you do! You're almost unearthly, you're so clever."
P21| He stood without moving—almost without breathing—until the robin fluttered its wings again and flew away. Then he stood looking at the handle of the spade as if there might be magic in it. Finally, he began to dig again and said nothing for several minutes.
P22| But because he kept breaking into a slow grin now and then, Mary was not afraid to talk to him.
P23| "Do you have a garden of your own?" she asked.
P24| "No. I'm a bachelor, and I lodge with Martin at the gate."
P25| "If you had one," said Mary, "what would you plant?"
P26| "Cabbages, potatoes, and onions."
P27| "But if you wanted to make a flower garden," Mary persisted, "what would you plant?"
P28| "Bulbs and sweet-smelling things—but mostly roses."
P29| Mary's face lit up.
P30| "Do you like roses?" she asked.
P31| Ben Weatherstaff pulled up a weed and threw it aside before he answered.
P32| "Well, yes, I do. I was taught to love them by a young lady I was gardener to. She had a lot of them in a place she was fond of, and she loved them like they were children—or robins. I've seen her bend over and kiss them." He dragged out another weed and scowled at it. "That was as much as ten years ago."
P33| "Where is she now?" Mary asked, very interested.
P34| "Heaven," he answered, and drove his spade deep into the soil, "according to what the parson says."
P35| "What happened to the roses?" Mary asked again, more interested than ever.
P36| "They were left to themselves."
P37| Mary was becoming quite excited.
P38| "Did they die? Do roses completely die when they are left to themselves?" she ventured.
P39| "Well, I'd grown to like them—and I liked her—and she liked them," Ben Weatherstaff admitted reluctantly. "Once or twice a year I'd go and work on them a bit—prune them and dig around the roots. They ran wild, but they were in rich soil, so some of them lived."
P40| "When they have no leaves and look gray and brown and dry, how can you tell whether they are dead or alive?" Mary asked.
P41| "Wait until the spring gets at them—wait until the sun shines on the rain and the rain falls on the sunshine, and then you'll find out."
P42| "How? How?" Mary cried, forgetting to be careful.
P43| "Look along the twigs and branches. If you see a tiny brown lump swelling here and there, watch it after the warm rain and see what happens." He stopped suddenly and looked curiously at her eager face. "Why do you care so much about roses and such, all of a sudden?" he demanded.
P44| Mary felt her face turn red. She was almost afraid to answer.
P45| "I—I want to play that—that I have a garden of my own," she stammered. "I—there is nothing for me to do. I have nothing—and no one."
P46| "Well," said Ben Weatherstaff slowly, as he watched her, "that's true. You haven't."
P47| He said it in such a strange way that Mary wondered if he was actually a little sorry for her. She had never felt sorry for herself; she had only felt tired and cross because she disliked people and things so much. But now the world seemed to be changing and getting nicer. If no one found out about the secret garden, she would enjoy herself forever.
P48| She stayed with him for ten or fifteen minutes longer, asking him as many questions as she dared. He answered every one of them in his usual grunting way, but he did not seem truly angry, and he did not pick up his spade and leave her. He mentioned something about roses just as she was going away, which reminded her of the ones he had said he loved.
P49| "Do you go and see those other roses now?" she asked.
P50| "Haven't been this year. My rheumatism has made me too stiff in the joints."
P51| He said it in his grumbling voice, and then quite suddenly, he seemed to get angry with her, though she did not see why he should.
P52| "Now look here!" he said sharply. "Don't you ask so many questions. You're the worst girl for asking questions I've ever come across. Go along now and play. I'm done talking for today."
P53| He said it so crossly that she knew there was no point in staying another minute. She went skipping slowly down the outside walk, thinking about him. She said to herself that, strange as it was, here was another person she liked despite his grumpiness. She liked old Ben Weatherstaff. Yes, she did like him. She always wanted to try to make him talk to her. She also began to believe that he knew everything in the world about flowers.
P54| There was a laurel-hedged path that curved around the secret garden and ended at a gate opening into a wood in the park. She decided to slip along this path and look into the wood to see if there were any rabbits hopping about. She enjoyed skipping very much, and when she reached the little gate, she opened it and went through because she heard a low, peculiar whistling sound and wanted to find out what it was.
P55| It was a very strange sight indeed. She caught her breath as she stopped to look. A boy was sitting under a tree, leaning his back against it and playing a rough wooden pipe. He was a funny-looking boy, about twelve years old. He looked very clean, his nose turned up, and his cheeks were as red as poppies. Mary had never seen such round, blue eyes in any boy's face. Clinging to the trunk of the tree he leaned against was a brown squirrel, watching him. From behind a nearby bush, a cock pheasant was delicately stretching its neck to peek out, and quite close to him, two rabbits were sitting up, sniffing with trembling noses. It actually looked as if they had all gathered to watch him and listen to the strange, low little tune his pipe made.
P56| When he saw Mary, he held up his hand and spoke to her in a voice almost as low and quiet as his piping.
P57| "Don't move," he said. "It'll frighten them."
P58| Mary stood perfectly still. He stopped playing his pipe and began to rise from the ground. He moved so slowly that it barely seemed like he was moving at all. Finally, he stood on his feet. At that, the squirrel scampered back up into the branches of the tree, the pheasant withdrew its head, and the rabbits dropped back onto all fours and hopped away, though not as if they were frightened.
P59| "I'm Dickon," the boy said. "I know you're Miss Mary."
P60| Then Mary realized that somehow she had known all along that he was Dickon. Who else could have charmed rabbits and pheasants the way Indian snake charmers charm snakes? He had a wide, red, curving mouth, and his smile spread all over his face.
P61| "I got up slowly," he explained, "because if you make a quick move, it startles them. A person has to move gently and speak softly when wild things are around."
P62| He did not speak to her as if they had never met, but rather as if he knew her quite well. Mary knew nothing about boys, and she spoke to him a little stiffly because she felt rather shy.
P63| "Did you get Martha's letter?" she asked.
P64| He nodded his curly, rust-colored head.
P65| "That's why I came."
P66| He stooped to pick up something that had been lying on the ground beside him while he played.
P67| "I've got the garden tools. There's a little spade, a rake, a fork, and a hoe. Oh, they are good ones! There's a trowel, too. And the woman in the shop threw in a packet of white poppy seeds and one of blue larkspur when I bought the other seeds."
P68| "Will you show the seeds to me?" Mary asked.
P69| She wished she could talk the way he did. His speech was so quick and easy. It sounded as if he liked her and was not at all afraid that she wouldn't like him, even though he was only a common moor boy in patched clothes, with a funny face and a rough, rusty-red head. As she came closer, she noticed a clean, fresh scent of heather, grass, and leaves around him, almost as if he were made of them. She liked it very much, and when she looked into his funny face with the red cheeks and round blue eyes, she forgot to feel shy.
P70| "Let us sit down on this log and look at them," she said.
P71| They sat down, and he took a clumsy little brown paper package out of his coat pocket. He untied the string, revealing many smaller, neater packages inside, each with a picture of a flower on it.
P72| "There's a lot of mignonette and poppies," he said. "Mignonette is the sweetest-smelling thing that grows, and it'll grow wherever you throw the seeds, just like poppies. The ones that come up and bloom if you just whistle to them, those are the nicest of all."
P73| He stopped and turned his head quickly, his bright face lighting up.
P74| "Where's that robin that is calling us?" he said.
P75| The chirp came from a thick holly bush, bright with scarlet berries, and Mary thought she knew whose robin it was.
P76| "Is it really calling us?" she asked.
P77| "Aye," said Dickon, as if it were the most natural thing in the world. "He's calling someone he's friends with. That's his way of saying, 'Here I am. Look at me. I want a bit of a chat.' There he is in the bush. Whose is he?"
P78| "He's Ben Weatherstaff's, but I think he knows me a little," Mary answered.
P79| "Aye, he knows you," Dickon said in his low voice. "And he likes you. He's taken to you. He'll tell me all about you in a minute."
P80| He moved close to the bush with the same slow, gentle movements Mary had noticed before. Then he made a sound that was almost like the robin's own twitter. The robin listened intently for a few seconds, then chirped back as if answering a question.
P81| "Aye, he's a friend of yours," chuckled Dickon.
P82| "Do you think he is?" Mary cried eagerly. She wanted to know so badly. "Do you think he really likes me?"
P83| "He wouldn't come near you if he didn't," Dickon answered. "Birds are very choosy, and a robin can snub a person worse than a human can. See, he's showing off for you now. 'Can't you see a chap?' he's saying."
P84| And it really seemed to be true. The robin tilted, sidled, and twittered as he hopped on his bush.
P85| "Do you understand everything birds say?" Mary asked.
P86| Dickon's grin widened until his mouth seemed to stretch across his face, and he rubbed his rough head.
P87| "I think I do, and they think I do," he said. "I've lived on the moor with them for so long. I've watched them break their shells, grow their feathers, learn to fly, and begin to sing, until I feel like I'm one of them. Sometimes I think maybe I'm a bird, or a fox, or a rabbit, or a squirrel, or even a beetle, and I just don't know it."
P88| He laughed, came back to the log, and began to talk about the flower seeds again. He told her what they would look like when they bloomed, how to plant them, watch them, and how to water and care for them.
P89| "Look here," he said suddenly, turning to look at her. "I'll plant them for you myself. Where is your garden?"
P90| Mary's thin hands clutched each other in her lap. She did not know what to say, so she sat in silence for a whole minute. She had never thought about this possibility. She felt miserable, turning red and then pale.
P91| "You've got a bit of a garden, haven't you?" Dickon asked.
P92| It was true that she had flushed and then turned pale. Dickon saw it, and since she still said nothing, he began to look puzzled.
P93| "Wouldn't they give you a little plot?" he asked. "Haven't you got one yet?"
P94| She squeezed her hands together even tighter and looked at him.
P95| "I don't know anything about boys," she said slowly. "Could you keep a secret if I told you one? It's a huge secret. I don't know what I would do if anyone found out. I think I would die!" She said the last words almost fiercely.
P96| Dickon looked more puzzled than ever and rubbed his hand over his rough hair again, but he answered good-naturedly.
P97| "I'm keeping secrets all the time," he said. "If I couldn't keep secrets from the other boys—secrets about fox cubs, birds' nests, and wild animals' holes—nothing on the moor would be safe. Yes, I can keep a secret."
P98| Mary hadn't meant to reach out and grab his sleeve, but she did.
P99| "I've stolen a garden," she said quickly. "It isn't mine. It isn't anyone's. Nobody wants it, nobody cares for it, and nobody ever goes inside. Perhaps everything in it is already dead. I don't know."
P100| She began to feel hot and defiant, more stubborn than ever before.
P101| "I don't care, I don't care! Nobody has any right to take it from me when I care about it and they don't. They're just letting it die, locked away all by itself," she ended passionately. She threw her arms over her face and burst into tears—poor little Mary.
P102| Dickon's curious blue eyes grew wider and wider.
P103| "Oh!" he said, drawing the sound out slowly in a way that showed both wonder and deep sympathy.
P104| "I have nothing to do," Mary sobbed. "Nothing belongs to me. I found it myself, and I got in by myself. I was just like the robin, and they wouldn't take it away from the robin."
P105| "Where is it?" Dickon asked in a quiet, low voice.
P106| Mary stood up from the log at once. Her defiant, obstinate mood returned, and she did not care anymore. She felt proud and stubborn, yet hot and sorrowful all at once.
P107| "Come with me and I'll show you," she said.
P108| She led him around the laurel path to the walk where the ivy grew so thickly. Dickon followed her with a curious, almost pitying look on his face. He felt as if he were being led to see some rare bird's nest and needed to move very softly. When she stepped to the wall and lifted the hanging ivy, he gasped. There was a door, and Mary pushed it slowly open. They stepped inside together, and Mary waved her hand around defiantly.
P109| "It's this," she said. "It's a secret garden, and I'm the only person in the world who wants it to be alive."
P110| Dickon looked all around the garden, taking it in slowly, again and again.
P111| "Oh!" he almost whispered. "It is a strange, lovely place! It feels just like being in a dream."
