P1| Chapter 11: The Nest of the Missel Thrush
P2| For two or three minutes, he stood looking around him while Mary watched. Then he began to walk about softly, stepping even more lightly than Mary had when she first found herself inside the four walls. His eyes seemed to take in everything—the gray trees with gray vines climbing over them and hanging from their branches, the tangles on the walls and in the grass, and the evergreen alcoves with stone seats and tall flower urns standing inside them.
P3| "I never thought I’d see this place," he said at last in a whisper.
P4| "Did you know about it?" asked Mary.
P5| She had spoken aloud, and he made a sign for her to be quiet.
P6| "We must speak softly," he said, "or someone will hear us and wonder what is going on in here."
P7| "Oh! I forgot!" Mary said, feeling startled and quickly putting her hand over her mouth. "Did you know about the garden?" she asked again once she had recovered herself.
P8| Dickon nodded.
P9| "Martha told me there was one that no one was ever allowed inside," he answered. "We used to wonder what it was like."
P10| He stopped and looked around at the lovely gray tangle about him, his round eyes shining with a strange happiness.
P11| "Oh, the nests that will be here come spring!" he said. "It will be the safest nesting place in England. With no one ever coming near, and plenty of tangled trees and roses to build in. I wonder why all the birds on the moor don't build here."
P12| Mary put her hand on his arm again without realizing it.
P13| "Will there be roses?" she whispered. "Can you tell? I thought maybe they were all dead."
P14| "Oh, no! Not them—not all of them!" he answered. "Look here!"
P15| He stepped over to the nearest tree—a very old one covered in gray lichen, but supporting a curtain of tangled branches and shoots. He took a sturdy pocketknife out of his pocket and opened one of the blades.
P16| "There's lots of dead wood that needs to be cut out," he said. "And there's a lot of old wood, but it grew some new branches last year. This one here is new," and he touched a shoot that looked brownish-green instead of hard, dry gray.
P17| Mary touched it herself in an eager, respectful way.
P18| "That one?" she said. "Is that one completely alive—really?"
P19| Dickon smiled wide.
P20| "It’s as wick as you or me," he said. Mary remembered that Martha had told her "wick" meant alive or lively.
P21| "I'm glad it's wick!" she whispered excitedly. "I want them all to be alive. Let's go around the garden and count how many live ones there are."
P22| She was breathless with excitement, and Dickon was just as eager. They went from tree to tree and from bush to bush. Dickon carried his knife in his hand, showing her things she found absolutely wonderful.
P23| "They've run wild," he said, "but the strongest ones have really thrived on it. The most delicate ones have died out, but the others have grown and grown, and spread and spread, until they're amazing. Look here!" He pulled down a thick, gray, dry-looking branch. "A person might think this was dead wood, but I don't believe it is—not down to the root. I'll cut it close to the ground and see."
P24| He knelt down and cut through the dead-looking branch just above the ground.
P25| "There!" he said triumphantly. "I told you so. There's green in that wood yet. Look at it."
P26| Mary was down on her knees before he even finished speaking, staring at it with all her might.
P27| "When it looks a bit greenish and juicy like that, it's alive," he explained. "When the inside is dry and breaks easily, like this piece I've cut off, it's done for. There's a big root here that all this live wood sprang from. If the old wood is cut away, and the dirt is dug up around it and taken care of, there'll be—" He stopped and looked up at the climbing, hanging branches above him. "There'll be a fountain of roses here this summer."
P28| They went from bush to bush and from tree to tree. He was very strong and skilled with his knife, knowing exactly how to prune the dry, dead wood away and telling when a hopeless-looking branch or twig still had green life in it. Within half an hour, Mary felt like she could tell too. Whenever he cut through a dead-looking branch and she caught sight of the slightest hint of moist green, she would cry out joyfully under her breath. The spade, hoe, and weeding fork were incredibly useful. He showed her how to use the fork while he dug around the roots with the spade, turning the soil and letting the air in.
P29| They were working hard around one of the biggest rosebushes when he caught sight of something that made him gasp in surprise.
P30| "Look!" he cried, pointing to the grass a few feet away. "Who did that?"
P31| It was one of Mary's own little cleared patches around the pale green shoots.
P32| "I did it," Mary said.
P33| "Why, I thought you didn't know anything about gardening," he exclaimed.
P34| "I don't," she answered. "But they were so tiny, and the grass was so thick and strong, they looked like they had no room to breathe. So I made space for them. I don't even know what they are."
P35| Dickon walked over and knelt down by them, smiling his wide smile.
P36| "You were right," he said. "A professional gardener couldn't have told you any better. They'll grow like Jack's beanstalk now. They're crocuses and snowdrops, and these here are narcissuses," he said, turning to another patch, "and here are daffodils. Oh! They will be a beautiful sight."
P37| He ran from one cleared patch to another.
P38| "You've done a lot of work for such a little girl," he said, looking her over.
P39| "I'm gaining weight," Mary said, "and I'm growing stronger. I used to be tired all the time. When I dig, I don't feel tired at all. I love the smell of the earth when it's turned over."
P40| "It's really good for you," he said, nodding his head wisely. "There's nothing as nice as the smell of good, clean dirt, except the smell of fresh, growing things when the rain falls on them. I go out on the moor many a day when it's raining, lying under a bush to listen to the soft swish of the drops on the heather, and I just sniff and sniff. My mother says the tip of my nose actually quivers like a rabbit's."
P41| "Do you never catch a cold?" Mary asked, staring at him in wonder. She had never seen such a funny, nice boy.
P42| "Not me," he said, grinning. "I've never caught a cold in my life. I wasn't raised to be delicate. I've run around the moor in all kinds of weather, just like the rabbits do. Mother says I've breathed in too much fresh air over twelve years to ever get a stuffy nose. I'm as tough as a thorny walking stick."
P43| He kept working while he talked, and Mary followed him, helping with her fork or trowel.
P44| "There's so much work to do here!" he said once, looking around with pure joy.
P45| "Will you come back and help me do it?" Mary begged. "I know I can help too. I can dig, pull up weeds, and do whatever you tell me. Oh, please come, Dickon!"
P46| "I'll come every day if you want me to, rain or shine," he answered stoutly. "This is the best fun I've ever had in my life—being shut in here and waking up a garden."
P47| "If you come," Mary said, "and help me bring it back to life, I'll—I don't know what I'll do," she finished helplessly. What could anyone do for a boy like him?
P48| "I'll tell you what you'll do," Dickon said with his happy grin. "You'll get healthy and strong, you'll get as hungry as a young fox, and you'll learn how to talk to the robin just like I do. Oh, we'll have so much fun!"
P49| He began to walk around, looking up at the trees, walls, and bushes with a thoughtful expression.
P50| "I wouldn't want to make it look like a professional gardener's garden, all trimmed and perfectly neat, would you?" he said. "It's much nicer like this, with everything running wild, swinging and grabbing onto each other."
P51| "Let's not make it tidy," Mary said anxiously. "It wouldn't feel like a secret garden if it were neat."
P52| Dickon stood scratching his rusty-red hair with a puzzled look.
P53| "It's a secret garden sure enough," he said, "but it seems like someone besides the robin has been in here since it was locked up ten years ago."
P54| "But the door was locked and the key was buried," Mary said. "No one could get in."
P55| "That's true," he answered. "It's a strange place. It looks to me like some pruning was done here and there, more recently than ten years ago."
P56| "But how could that be?" Mary asked.
P57| He was examining a branch of a rosebush and shook his head.
P58| "Yes, how could they?" he murmured. "With the door locked and the key buried."
P59a| Mary felt that no matter how long she lived, she would never forget that first morning when her garden began to grow. Of course, it really did seem to start growing for her that very day. As Dickon began clearing spots to plant seeds, she remembered what Basil had sung to tease her.
P59b| "Are there any flowers that look like bells?" she asked.
P60| "Lilies of the valley do," he answered, digging away with the trowel, "and there are Canterbury bells and campanulas."
P61| "Let's plant some," Mary said.
P62| "There are lilies of the valley here already; I saw them. They've grown too close together, and we'll have to separate them, but there are plenty. The other flowers take two years to bloom from seeds, but I can bring you some starter plants from our cottage garden. Why do you want them?"
P63a| Then Mary told him about Basil and his siblings in India, how much she had hated them, and how they used to call her "Mistress Mary, Quite Contrary."
P63b| "They used to dance around and sing at me. They sang:
P63c| 'Mistress Mary, quite contrary,
P63d| How does your garden grow?
P64a| With silver bells, and cockle shells,
P64b| And marigolds all in a row.'
P64c| I just remembered it, and it made me wonder if there were really flowers like silver bells."
P65| She frowned a little and dug her trowel into the dirt with a bit of spite.
P66a| "I wasn't as stubborn as they were."
P66b| But Dickon laughed.
P67| "Oh!" he said, crumbling the rich black soil, and she saw him sniffing its scent. "There doesn't seem to be any reason for anyone to be contrary when there are flowers and things, and so many friendly wild creatures running around making homes, building nests, and singing and whistling, does there?"
P68| Mary, kneeling beside him and holding the seeds, looked at him and stopped frowning.
P69| "Dickon," she said, "you are just as nice as Martha said you were. I like you, and you make the fifth person. I never thought I would like five people."
P70| Dickon sat back on his heels, just as Martha did when she was polishing the fireplace grate. He looked so funny and delightful, Mary thought, with his round blue eyes, red cheeks, and happy, turned-up nose.
P71a| "Only five people that you like?" he asked. "Who are the other four?"
P71b| "Your mother and Martha," Mary said, counting them on her fingers, "and the robin, and Ben Weatherstaff."
P71c| Dickon laughed so hard he had to muffle the sound by putting his arm over his mouth.
P71d| "I know you think I'm a strange lad," he said, "but I think you're the strangest little girl I've ever seen."
P72| Then Mary did a strange thing. She leaned forward and asked him a question she had never dreamed of asking anyone before. She tried to ask it in Yorkshire because that was his language, and in India, local people were always pleased if you spoke their tongue.
P73a| "Does tha' like me?" she asked.
P73b| "Oh!" he answered heartily. "That I do. I like you wonderfully, and so does the robin, I truly believe!"
P74a| "That's two, then," Mary said. "That's two who like me."
P74b| Then they began to work harder and more joyfully than ever. Mary was startled and sorry when she heard the big clock in the courtyard strike the hour for lunch.
P75| "I have to go," she said sadly. "And you have to go too, don't you?"
P76a| Dickon grinned.
P76b| "My lunch is easy to carry around," he said. "Mother always lets me put a bit of something in my pocket."
P77| He picked up his coat from the grass and pulled a lumpy little bundle out of the pocket, wrapped in a clean, coarse blue-and-white handkerchief. It contained two thick slices of bread with something sandwiched between them.
P78| "It's usually nothing but bread," he said, "but I've got a nice slice of fat bacon with it today."
P79a| Mary thought it looked like a strange lunch, but he seemed ready to enjoy it.
P79b| "Go on and get your food," he said. "I'll be finished with mine first. I'll get a bit more work done before I head back home."
P79c| He sat down with his back against a tree.
P80| "I'll call the robin over," he said, "and give him the bacon rind to peck at. Robins really love a bit of fat."
P81| Mary could hardly bear to leave him. Suddenly, she worried he might be a kind of forest elf who would vanish by the time she came back to the garden. He seemed too good to be true. She walked slowly halfway to the door in the wall, then stopped and turned back.
P82| "Whatever happens, you—you would never tell anyone?" she asked.
P83| His bright red cheeks were stuffed with his first big bite of bread and bacon, but he managed to smile encouragingly.
P84| "If you were a missel thrush and showed me where your nest was, do you think I'd tell anyone? Not me," he said. "You're as safe as a missel thrush."
P85| And she was quite sure she was.
