P1| Chapter 17: A Tantrum
P2| She had gotten up very early in the morning and worked hard in the garden. She was tired and sleepy, so as soon as Martha brought her supper and she finished it, she was glad to go to bed. As she laid her head on the pillow, she murmured to herself:
P3| "I'll go out before breakfast and work with Dickon. And then afterward—I think—I'll go see him."
P4| She thought it was the middle of the night when she was awakened by such dreadful sounds that she jumped out of bed instantly. What was it? What was it? The next minute, she felt sure she knew. Doors were opening and shutting, there were hurrying feet in the corridors, and someone was crying and screaming at the same time—screaming and crying in a horrible way.
P5| "It's Colin," she said. "He's having one of those tantrums the nurse called hysterics. How awful it sounds."
P6| As she listened to the sobbing screams, she did not wonder that people were so frightened they let him have his own way in everything just to avoid hearing them. She put her hands over her ears, feeling sick and shivering.
P7| "I don't know what to do. I don't know what to do," she kept saying. "I can't bear it."
P8| Once she wondered if he would stop if she dared to go to him. Then she remembered how he had driven her out of the room, and thought that seeing her might make him worse. Even when she pressed her hands tightly over her ears, she could not block out the awful sounds. She hated them so much and was so terrified by them that suddenly they began to make her angry. She felt like throwing a tantrum of her own, just to frighten him as he was frightening her. She was not used to anyone's bad temper but her own. She took her hands from her ears, jumped up, and stamped her foot.
P9| "He ought to be stopped! Somebody ought to make him stop! Somebody ought to beat him!" she cried out.
P10| Just then, she heard feet almost running down the corridor. Her door opened and the nurse came in. She was not laughing now by any means; she actually looked rather pale.
P11| "He's worked himself into hysterics," she said in a great hurry. "He'll hurt himself. No one can do anything with him. You come and try, like a good child. He likes you."
P12| "He turned me out of the room this morning," said Mary, stamping her foot with excitement.
P13| The stamp rather pleased the nurse. The truth was, she had been afraid she might find Mary crying and hiding her head under the blankets.
P14| "That's right," she said. "You're in the right mood. Go and scold him. Give him something new to think about. Do go, child, as fast as you can."
P15| It was not until afterward that Mary realized how funny the situation had been, as well as dreadful. It was funny that all the grown-ups were so frightened they turned to a little girl, simply because they guessed she could be almost as bad-tempered as Colin himself.
P16| She flew along the corridor, and the closer she got to the screams, the more her temper rose. She felt quite wicked by the time she reached the door. She slapped it open with her hand and ran across the room to the four-poster bed.
P17| "You stop!" she almost shouted. "You stop! I hate you! Everybody hates you! I wish everyone would run out of the house and let you scream yourself to death! You will scream yourself to death in a minute, and I wish you would!"
P18| A sweet, sympathetic child could never have thought or said such things, but the shock of hearing them was the best possible thing for this hysterical boy, whom no one had ever dared to stop or contradict.
P19| He had been lying on his face, beating his pillow with his hands. He actually spun around, turning so quickly at the sound of the furious little voice. His face looked dreadful—white, red, and swollen—and he was gasping and choking. But furious little Mary did not care a bit.
P20| "If you scream one more scream," she said, "I'll scream too—and I can scream louder than you can, and I'll frighten you! I'll frighten you!"
P21| He actually stopped screaming because she had startled him so much. The scream that was about to come out almost choked him. Tears were streaming down his face, and he shook all over.
P22| "I can't stop!" he gasped and sobbed. "I can't—I can't!"
P23| "You can!" shouted Mary. "Half of what's wrong with you is just hysterics and temper—just hysterics, hysterics, hysterics!" And she stamped her foot every time she said it.
P24| "I felt the lump—I felt it," Colin choked out. "I knew I would. I'll get a hunchback and then I'll die." He began to twist and turn again, burying his face as he sobbed and wailed, but he did not scream.
P25| "You did not feel a lump!" Mary fiercely contradicted him. "If you did, it was only a hysterical lump. Hysterics cause lumps. There's nothing wrong with your horrid back—nothing but hysterics! Turn over and let me look at it!"
P26| She liked the word "hysterics" and felt that it was working on him. He was probably like her and had never heard it before.
P27| "Nurse," she commanded, "come here and show me his back this minute!"
P28| The nurse, Mrs. Medlock, and Martha had been standing huddled together near the door, staring at Mary with their mouths half open. All three had gasped with fright more than once. The nurse came forward as if she were half afraid. Colin was heaving with great, breathless sobs.
P29| "Perhaps he—he won't let me," she hesitated in a low voice.
P30| Colin heard her, however, and gasped out between his sobs:
P31| "Sh-show her! Sh-she'll see then!"
P32| It was a poor, thin back to look at when it was bared. Every rib could be counted, along with every joint of the spine. Mistress Mary did not count them, though, as she bent over to examine them with a solemn, stern little face. She looked so serious and old-fashioned that the nurse turned her head away to hide a smile. There was a minute of silence, and even Colin tried to hold his breath while Mary looked up and down his spine, back and forth, as intently as if she were the great doctor from London.
P33| "There's not a single lump there!" she said at last. "There's not a lump as big as a pin—except for your backbone, and you can only feel that because you're thin. I have backbone bumps myself, and they used to stick out just as much as yours do, until I started putting on weight. I'm still not fat enough to hide them completely. There's not a lump as big as a pin! If you ever say there is again, I'll laugh at you!"
P34| No one but Colin knew what a powerful effect those cross, childish words had on him. If he had ever had anyone to talk to about his secret terrors—if he had ever dared to ask questions—if he had had other children to play with, instead of lying on his back in the huge, closed house, surrounded by the fears of people who were mostly ignorant and tired of him, he would have realized that most of his fear and illness was self-created. But he had lain there, thinking only of himself, his aches, and his weariness, for hours, days, months, and years. And now that an angry, unsympathetic little girl stubbornly insisted he was not as sick as he thought, he actually felt that she might be telling the truth.
P35| "I didn't know," the nurse ventured, "that he thought he had a lump on his spine. His back is weak simply because he won't try to sit up. I could have told him there was no lump there." Colin gulped and turned his head slightly to look at her.
P36| "C-could you?" he said pathetically.
P37| "Yes, sir."
P38| "There!" said Mary, and she gulped too.
P39| Colin turned onto his face again. Except for his shaky, long-drawn breaths as his storm of sobbing died down, he lay still for a minute, even though big tears streamed down his face and wet the pillow. Those tears actually brought him a strange, wonderful relief. Soon, he turned and looked at the nurse again, and surprisingly, he did not sound like an absolute ruler at all as he spoke to her.
P40| "Do you think—I could—live to grow up?" he asked.
P41| The nurse was neither clever nor particularly warm-hearted, but she could repeat the London doctor's words.
P42| "You probably will, if you do what you are told, control your temper, and spend a lot of time out in the fresh air."
P43| Colin's tantrum had passed, leaving him weak and exhausted from crying, and this perhaps made him feel gentler. He reached his hand out slightly toward Mary. I am glad to say that, since her own anger had faded, she softened too and met him halfway, taking his hand as a sign of peace.
P44| "I'll—I'll go out with you, Mary," he said. "I won't hate fresh air if we can find—" He remembered just in time to stop himself from saying "if we can find the secret garden," and finished, "I would like to go out with you if Dickon comes to push my chair. I want so much to see Dickon, and the fox, and the crow."
P45| The nurse remade the messy bed, shaking out and straightening the pillows. Then she made Colin a cup of hot broth and gave one to Mary, who was very glad to have it after all the excitement. Mrs. Medlock and Martha slipped away gladly. Once everything was neat and quiet again, the nurse looked as if she wanted to slip away too. She was a healthy young woman who disliked losing her sleep, and she yawned openly as she looked at Mary, who had pulled her big footstool close to the four-poster bed and was holding Colin's hand.
P46| "You should go back and finish your sleep," the nurse said to Mary. "He'll drift off after a while, if he's not too wound up. Then I'll lie down in the next room myself."
P47| "Would you like me to sing you that song I learned from my nanny?" Mary whispered to Colin.
P48| His hand pulled hers gently, and he turned his tired eyes toward her in appeal.
P49| "Oh, yes!" he answered. "It's such a soft song. I'll fall asleep in a minute."
P50| "I will help him fall asleep," Mary said to the yawning nurse. "You can go if you like."
P51| "Well," the nurse said, pretending to hesitate. "If he isn't asleep in half an hour, you must call me."
P52| "Very well," Mary answered.
P53| The nurse was out of the room in a moment. As soon as she had gone, Colin pulled Mary's hand again.
P54| "I almost told," he said, "but I stopped myself just in time. I won't talk now, and I'll go to sleep. But you said you had a whole lot of nice things to tell me. Have you—do you think you have found out anything at all about the way into the secret garden?"
P55| Mary looked at his poor, tired little face and swollen eyes, and her heart softened.
P56| "Yes," she answered, "I think I have. And if you go to sleep, I will tell you tomorrow." His hand trembled.
P57| "Oh, Mary!" he said. "Oh, Mary! If I could get inside it, I think I would live to grow up! Do you think, instead of singing the nanny's song, you could just tell me softly—like you did that first day—what you imagine it looks like inside? I'm sure that will put me to sleep."
P58| "Yes," answered Mary. "Shut your eyes."
P59| He closed his eyes and lay completely still. She held his hand and began to speak very slowly and in a very low voice.
P60| "I think it has been left alone so long that it has grown into a lovely tangle. I think the roses have climbed and climbed until they hang from the branches and walls, and creep over the ground like a strange gray mist. Some of them have died, but many are still alive. When summer comes, there will be curtains and fountains of roses. I think the ground is full of daffodils, snowdrops, lilies, and irises, all working their way out of the dark. Now that spring has begun—perhaps—perhaps—"
P61| The soft, soothing drone of her voice was making him stiller and stiller. She saw this and continued.
P62| "Perhaps they are coming up through the grass—perhaps there are clusters of purple and gold crocuses, even now. Perhaps the leaves are beginning to break out and uncurl. Perhaps the gray is changing, and a green veil is creeping over everything. And the birds are coming to look at it, because it is so safe and still. And perhaps—perhaps—perhaps—" she whispered very softly and slowly, "the robin has found a mate, and is building a nest."
P63| And Colin was asleep.
