P1| Chapter 22: When the Sun Went Down
P2| When his head was out of sight, Colin turned to Mary.
P3| "Go and meet him," he said, and Mary flew across the grass to the door under the ivy.
P4| Dickon was watching him with sharp eyes. There were scarlet spots on Colin's cheeks and he looked amazing, but he showed no signs of falling.
P5| "I can stand," he said. He still held his head high and said it quite grandly.
P6| "I told you you could as soon as you stopped being afraid," answered Dickon. "And you've stopped."
P7| "Yes, I've stopped," said Colin.
P8| Then suddenly he remembered something Mary had said.
P9| "Are you making Magic?" he asked sharply.
P10| Dickon's curly mouth spread in a cheerful grin.
P11| "You're making Magic yourself," he said. "It's the same Magic that made these grow out of the earth," and he touched a clump of crocuses in the grass with his thick boot.
P12| Colin looked down at them.
P13| "Yes," he said slowly, "there couldn't be any greater Magic than that—there couldn't be."
P14| He drew himself up straighter than ever.
P15| "I'm going to walk to that tree," he said, pointing to one a few feet away from him. "I'm going to be standing when Weatherstaff comes here. I can rest against the tree if I want. When I want to sit down I will sit down, but not before. Bring a rug from the chair."
P16| He walked to the tree, and though Dickon held his arm, he was wonderfully steady. When he stood against the tree trunk, it wasn't obvious that he was leaning against it. He still held himself so straight that he looked tall.
P17| When Ben Weatherstaff came through the door in the wall, he saw Colin standing there, and he heard Mary muttering something under her breath.
P18| "What are you saying?" he asked rather testily. He didn't want his attention distracted from the boy's tall, thin, straight figure and proud face.
P19| But she did not tell him. What she was saying was this:
P20| "You can do it! You can do it! I told you you could! You can do it! You can do it! You can!"
P21| She was saying it to Colin because she wanted to make Magic and keep him on his feet, looking just like that. She couldn't bear the thought of him giving in before Ben Weatherstaff. He didn't give in. She felt uplifted by a sudden feeling that he looked quite beautiful, in spite of how thin he was. He fixed his eyes on Ben Weatherstaff in his funny, commanding way.
P22| "Look at me!" he commanded. "Look at me all over! Am I a hunchback? Do I have crooked legs?"
P23| Ben Weatherstaff had not quite got over his emotion, but he had recovered a little and answered almost in his usual way.
P24| "Not you," he said. "Nothing of the sort. What have you been doing with yourself—hiding out of sight and letting people think you were a cripple and half-witted?"
P25| "Half-witted!" said Colin angrily. "Who thought that?"
P26| "Lots of fools," said Ben. "The world is full of jackasses braying, and they never bray anything but lies. What did you shut yourself up for?"
P27| "Everyone thought I was going to die," said Colin shortly. "But I'm not!"
P28| And he said it with such decision that Ben Weatherstaff looked him over, up and down, down and up.
P29| "You, die!" he said with dry joy. "Nothing of the sort! You've got too much pluck in you. When I saw you put your legs on the ground in such a hurry, I knew you were all right. Sit down on the rug a bit, young master, and give me your orders."
P30| There was a strange mixture of grumpy tenderness and sharp understanding in his manner. Mary had talked as fast as she could as they walked down the Long Walk. The main thing to remember, she had told him, was that Colin was getting well—getting well. The garden was doing it. No one must let him think about having a hunched back or dying.
P31| The young Rajah condescended to sit on a rug under the tree.
P32| "What work do you do in the gardens, Weatherstaff?" he asked.
P33| "Anything I'm told to do," answered old Ben. "I'm kept on as a favor—because she liked me."
P34| "She?" said Colin.
P35| "Your mother," answered Ben Weatherstaff.
P36| "My mother?" said Colin, and he looked around quietly. "This was her garden, wasn't it?"
P37| "Yes, it was!" and Ben Weatherstaff looked around, too. "She was very fond of it."
P38| "It is my garden now. I am fond of it. I shall come here every day," Colin announced. "But it has to be a secret. My orders are that no one is to know that we come here. Dickon and my cousin have worked and made it come alive. I shall send for you sometimes to help—but you must come when no one can see you."
P39| Ben Weatherstaff's face twisted into a dry old smile.
P40| "I've come here before when no one saw me," he said.
P41| "What!" Colin exclaimed. "When?"
P42| "The last time I was here," he said, rubbing his chin and looking around, "was about two years ago."
P43| "But no one has been in it for ten years!" cried Colin. "There was no door!"
P44| "I'm no one," old Ben said dryly. "And I didn't come through the door. I came over the wall. The rheumatism held me back these last two years."
P45| "You came and did a bit of pruning!" Dickon cried. "I couldn't make out how it had been done."
P46| "She was so fond of it—she was!" Ben Weatherstaff said slowly. "And she was such a pretty young thing. She said to me once, 'Ben,' she said, laughing, 'if I'm ever ill or if I go away, you must take care of my roses.' When she did go away, the orders were that no one was ever to come near. But I came," he added with grumpy stubbornness. "Over the wall I came—until the rheumatism stopped me—and I did a bit of work once a year. She had given her order first."
P47a| "It wouldn't be as alive as it is if you hadn't done it," Dickon said. "I did wonder about it."
P47b| "I'm glad you did it, Weatherstaff," said Colin. "You'll know how to keep the secret."
P47c| "Yes, I'll know, sir," Ben answered. "And it will be easier for a man with rheumatism to come in through the door."
P48| Mary had dropped her trowel on the grass near the tree. Colin stretched out his hand and picked it up. A strange expression came over his face, and he began to scratch at the earth. His thin hand was weak, but as they watched him—Mary with breathless interest—he drove the end of the trowel into the soil and turned some of it over.
P49| "You can do it! You can do it!" Mary whispered to herself. "I tell you, you can!"
P50| Dickon's round eyes were full of eager curiosity, but he did not say a word. Ben Weatherstaff looked on with an interested face.
P51a| Colin kept going. After he had turned a few trowelfuls of soil, he spoke triumphantly to Dickon, trying his best Yorkshire dialect.
P51b| "You said you'd have me walking about here just like other people—and you said you'd have me digging. I thought you were just lying to please me. This is only the first day, and I've walked—and here I am digging."
P52| Ben Weatherstaff's mouth fell open again when he heard him, but he ended up chuckling.
P53| "Well!" he said. "That sounds as if you've got wits enough. You're a Yorkshire lad for sure. And you're digging, too. How would you like to plant a bit of something? I can get you a rose in a pot."
P54| "Go and get it!" said Colin, digging excitedly. "Quick! Quick!"
P55| It was done quickly indeed. Ben Weatherstaff hurried off, forgetting all about his rheumatism. Dickon took his spade and dug the hole deeper and wider than a new digger with thin, white hands ever could. Mary slipped away to bring back a watering can. Once Dickon had deepened the hole, Colin went on turning the soft earth over and over. He looked up at the sky, flushed and glowing from the unfamiliar exercise, gentle though it was.
P56| "I want to do it before the sun goes all the way down," he said.
P57| Mary thought that perhaps the sun lingered for a few minutes just on purpose. Ben Weatherstaff brought the rose in its pot from the greenhouse. He hobbled across the grass as fast as he could, starting to feel excited, too. He knelt down by the hole and carefully slipped the pot off the soil.
P58| "Here, lad," he said, handing the plant to Colin. "Set it in the earth yourself, just like the king does when he visits a new place."
P59| Colin's thin, white hands shook a little, and his flush grew deeper as he set the rose into the soil and held it while old Ben packed the earth around it. It was filled in, pressed down, and made steady. Mary leaned forward on her hands and knees. Soot the crow had flown down and hopped closer to see what was happening. Nut and Shell chattered about it from a cherry tree.
P60| "It's planted!" Colin said at last. "And the sun is just slipping over the horizon. Help me up, Dickon. I want to be standing when it goes down. That's part of the Magic."
P61| And Dickon helped him up. The Magic—or whatever it was—gave him such strength that when the sun finally slipped below the horizon, ending that strange, lovely afternoon, Colin was actually standing on his own two feet, laughing.
